---
name: mgikit
url: https://github.com/sagc-bioinformatics/mgikit-multiqc
description: >
  mgikit is a collection of tools used to demultiplex fastq files and generate demultiplexing and quality reports.
---

# mgikit-multiqc Plugin

## General Information
mgikit plugin is a plugin incorporated with the [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/) tool in order to read the logs and reports
generated by the [MGIKIT demultiplexer](https://sagc-bioinformatics.github.io/mgikit/) and generate a quality control report similar to what a user gets
when using bcl2fastq tool.
If you have any questions, please get in touch on [Github](https://github.com/sagc-bioinformatics)

## Input files
This plugin reads the log files of MGIKIT demultiplexing tool. The possible output files are:
1. **General info file** ('\*.L{1,2,3,4}.mgikit.general'): This file contains information related to the reads generated by a specific lane including quality scores, cluster count...
2. **General info file** ('\*.L{1,2,3,4}.mgikit.info'): This file contains information about the matching indexes within the data generated by a specific lane.
3. **Undetermined barcodes file** ('\*.L{1,2,3,4}.mgikit.undetermined_barcode'): This file contains the information about the barcodes that did not match with any sample.
4. **Ambiguous barcodes file** ('\*.L{1,2,3,4}.mgikit.ambiguous_barcode'): This file contains the information about the barcodes that match with multiple samples. This situation can happen when setting a high mismatch threshold.

## Parameters
All parameters below are optional:
+ **`--disable-mgikit-plugin`**: Disable the mgikit MultiQC plugin on this run. The default is False.
+ **`--undetermined-barcode`**: The number of undetermined barcodes to be presented in the report. It
takes any positive value less than or equal to the number of barcodes in the demultiplexer reports
which is usually 50. The default is 25.
+ **`--decimal-positions`**: The number of decimal positions to be used with the values in the tables of the mgikit
plugin. 2 decimal positions are the default option.
+ **`--brief-report`**: Generate a brief version of the report. This ignores the reports for cluster per sample
per lane. The default is False.
+ **`--keep-core-samples`**: Ignore undetermined and ambiguous cases in the report. The default is False.

## Usage
When running MultiQC (after installing the mgikit plugin), the plugin will check for the mgikit reports
and logs and find the relevant one based on the suffix of the file names. When reports are detected,
the plugin will generate the relevant QC and attach them to the main MultiQC report under the MGIKIT
section.

For example:
```bash
multiqc MGIKIT-examples/test/
```
